# CSI 480 Problem Set 1

Welcome to the first problem set for CSI 480. In this problem set you will be working on a program that solves the [8-puzzle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/15_puzzle). The 8-puzzle is a classic sliding blocks game. You are provided a grid of 3 rows and 3 columns with 8 sliding block pieces within it (as well as a blank space). Each turn you can move one block into the blank space. The goal of the game is to move the blocks around until you have all of the blocks in increasing numerical order. The goal state looks like this (with `0` representing the blank space):

```
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 0
```

A starting state may look like this:

```
1 2 0
4 5 3
7 8 6
```

This state can be solved quite easily. Just two moves are needed. First, move the 3 up one space into the blank space. Then, move the 6 up one space into the blank space. This is the goal state.

To solve the puzzle automatically, you will use the A* algorithm, along with a heuristic function of your own design (although I will describe shortly one that works well for this problem, that you are welcome to implement). You are being provided a working version of the A* algorithm, as described in the reading you did. The goal of your program will be to find the shortest number of moves to solve the puzzle and to return those moves as a list. The unit tests will verify that your program returns the correct moves for various initial states.

## Instructions

Start by thinking about the problem and making sure you understand the 8-puzzle. There are many online 8-puzzle games that you can play to get a sense of it. For example, [here is one](https://slidingtiles.com/en/puzzle/play/art/25367-3x3-puzzle#3x3). It's important to think about the problem before you start coding. Try to at least win once.

You are being provided a lot of starter code including A* and a model of an 8-puzzle state. You are required to use the starter code, so spend some time reading over it.

The 8-puzzle will be provided to the `solution()` function in your program in the form of a string. The string will be formatted as a seqeuence of numbers, with each number representing a block in the puzzle, with no spaces. The numbers will be in the range 0-8, with 0 representing the blank space. For example, "123456780" is the goal state. And "120453786" is the state described in the example above.

You will need to parse the string into a 2D array of integers. The array will be formatted as a list of lists, where each sublist is a row of the puzzle. For example, the goal state above would be represented as [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 0]].

You will use the `astar()` function from `generic_search.py` to solve the puzzle. You will need to implement the `heuristic`, `goal_test`, and `successors` functions yourself. You can either do this as methods within `EightPuzzleState` or as stand-alone functions.

### A Good Heuristic

There are multiple heuristics that you can use that will be effective. However, one that works well for this problem is the sum of the Manhattan distances of each block to its goal position. Here's our example from above:

```
1 2 0
4 5 3
7 8 6
```

The following are the Manhattan distances for each block from its goal position:

```
0 0 0
0 0 1
0 0 1
```

The sum of the above is 1 + 1 = 2. So, our heuristic function for this problem is 2 if we are using the sum of Manhattan distances. In this version of the heuristic function, we have excluded the Manhattan distance of the blank space from the sum.

### Advice

Some of the `EightPuzzleState` methods are already implemented. They should help you. You are also invited to implement additional methods as you see fit. You can add to `__init__()` as well—but init must set the `self.board` variable for the unit tests to run correctly. You can also add additional helper functions as necessary.

You can compare your results to an [online 8-puzzle solver here](https://deniz.co/8-puzzle-solver/). It uses the same text format for defining the puzzle's position, so it is easy to compare your results. You can select A* from the dropdown menu and then click "Search".

Please carefully read the rules below and the rest of this `README.md` file before submitting your solution.

## Rules

1. You cannot use any third-party libraries or code.
2. Your solution must use `astar()` in `generic_search.py`. You should not be writing your own A*.
3. You cannot modify `astar()` or any of its support functions/classes in `generic_search.py`.
4. You cannot change the unit tests.
5. Cite all of your sources (even if you just look at them) in comments. Cite any people/classmates you discuss the problem with. Cite GitHub Copilot or any AI assistants if they produce snippets of code that are greater than 5 lines and non-trivial. Write something like, “Generated by GitHub Copilot.” 

Violating any of these rules will result in zero credit for the assignment.

## Setup

1. Create your own **private** repository from this repo by hitting the "Use this template" button at the top of the page. **Make sure to create the repository under your own account**, not the CSI480 organization.
2. Add me (@davecom) as a collaborator on your **private** repository.
3. Run the tests py running `python3 -m unittest` or by pushing to GitHub where the tests will automatically run (look for that big beautiful green checkmark).

## Grading

Partial credit will be provided for some tests passing, but not for code written that passes no tests. You are being graded based on working solutions, not amount of code written. Your grade will be the number of tests passed / the total number of tests * 7. For instance, if you pass 2/4 tests, your grade will be 3.5. Either tests pass or they don't.

## Note on Repository Access

This repository should stay private. If you make it public, you are possibly providing your solution to other students taking the class. Generally the problem sets in this class are not great portfolio projects because they are too small, or contain a significant portion of code that is not your own and therefore do not demonstrate your skill. Please keep your repository private so other students can't use your solution.
